hi jack hi Bob are you doing very well
thanks how are you I cannot complain let
me introduce us I'm Robert Wright this
is the right show available on both
streaming video and via audio podcast
you are Jack Goldsmith well known in in
circles of legal scholarship and and
really politics and policy or your
professor at Harvard Law School and you
served in the Justice Department of the
George W Bush administration where you
played an important role in handling
some issues of surveillance and civil
liberties we'll talk about all that but
there's a second part of your life that
has just come to light because you've
just published this book called in hafez
shadow a stepfather just a disappearance
in Detroit and my search for the truth
which is really a fascinating book I
really enjoyed it I was I was listening
to it I listened to it via audible and I
always always looked forward to taking a
walk so I could get back into it and
congratulations it's doing well getting
good reviews thank you very much
now what's interesting to me and we're
gonna do something that I Eve not sure
I've ever done which is I'm gonna devote
two consecutive shows to this book and
the reason is that there's an
interesting intersection between these
two dimensions of your life the
professional dimension I referred to and
then this the subject of the book which
is a the fact that you turn out to have
a strange kind of personal connection to
the disappearance of Jimmy Hoffa who
knew and and so and and then again there
turns out to be a kind of
interconnection between these stories
they intersect in the course of your
life when you're in the Bush
administration
kind of as a pivot actually yes yeah and
it's a fascinating kind of intersection
so I wanna I want to have plenty of time
to devote to the whole story and and the
first show is going to be about the kind
of true crime part you might
it's gonna be about Hoffa pal Hoffa and
a certain sense entered your life and
who what happened to Jimmy Hoffa of
course he famously disappeared he's you
know a union leader with connections to
the mob he disappeared in 1975 we're
going to talk about that whole story and
your connection to it then in the second
show we're going to get into both the
political backdrop of that and in the
part of the policy implications of it
you might say in the way though you know
it all came together in your life some
of which I should say will inevitably
cover in this conversation but but
that's the plan so the the personal
connection between you and Jimmy Hoffa
is that the man who for a long time in
fact is still conventionally taken by
most people to have driven Jimmy Hoffa
to his death picked him up that day and
delivered him to the people who would
kill him
we presume and we presume he was killed
in other words he's your stepfather and
and is the only true father figure in
your in your life in a certain sense
right he is that fair to say yeah sure
I mean my birth father was not a good
father at all he left our family twice
once when I was four then he came back
and Mary Mary my mom and left and I was
seven I was never close to him
I had another father or stepfather I was
not close to him when Chuckie came into
my life and when I was a 12 year old in
1975 Chuckie O'Brien who is your
stepfather
that's Chuckie O'Brien is his full name
and by the way characters based on him
had been portrayed in a number of movies
in in The Godfather by Robert Duvall and
I gather he's does a character appear in
this new movie the Irishman by Mark I
haven't seen the movie but according to
the previews is played by Jesse Plemons
and and
in that movie apparently sticks with the
conventional story which you give us
very good reason to doubt in this book
that he that he was the one who drove
Hoffa to his death yeah again I haven't
seen the movie yet but the book it's
based on repeats the conventional wisdom
yes okay so so so sorry go ahead talk
about
Chucky so Chucky came into my life when
I was 12 years old he had known my mom
when I was younger but and they they
didn't connect up and his Chucky's
mother a woman named Sylvia Pagano knew
my grandmother so that's how my mom knew
Chucky
Sylvia Pagano maybe we can talk about
later she was a really interesting
figure he came into my life when I was
12 years old I'd never had a father
figure and all of a sudden really
unexpectedly out of nowhere was this
extremely loving gentle believe it or
not caring man who spent all of his free
time with me and just gave me lots of
love and attention that I'd never had
from a man and my mom married him about
six weeks before Hoffa disappeared okay
so you're you're you're 12 years old he
comes into your life and and and in this
short period of time that he had been
your stepfather I gather you had already
really warmed up to him that is the
short period of time before Hoffa
disappeared and suddenly your
stepfathers name is in in the headlines
well I had known him for about six
months he came back into my mom's life
in December of the previous year 1974
and you know already in those six months
he had become an integral part of my
life I had become depend on him I come
to depend on him I might have started to
call him dad by then I can't remember
and we were very close I was 12 years
old and we basically when I wasn't in
school we spent any when he was around
he was sometimes in Detroit we spent all
of our free time together and so yes I'd
grown very very close to him I was
thrilled when my mom married him and
everything looked great in June of 1975
and he sounds the picture he paints he's
just liked the idea the kind of father
you would see in like a TV show
representing the perfect father well I
wouldn't say that I mean yes yes in the
sense that he gave me
unquestioned love and attention and he
gave me physical security my mom wasn't
well and and all of the and supported me
completely and taught me right from
wrong in a lot of important ways he
wasn't he didn't care about education
that wasn't important to him he his own
values weren't peanuts weren't what I
would think of a sound now in his
personal life he wasn't he was terrible
with money he was always broke and
always in debt but all of that stuff was
stuff I didn't notice what I noticed was
the love and attention and the care he
gave me okay so before we continue that
part of the story why are we back up and
say a little more about Jimmy Hoffa for
people who only have a dim conception of
him that would have included me before I
read the book I mean you know famous
labor leader had mob connections
disappeared presumably killed by the mob
what what what would you say he's
underappreciated about Jimmy Hoffa I
would say what yes what was
underappreciated about him today because
he gets all all gets lost in the
disappearance and in his in his
undoubted criminality throughout his
career what gets lost is what an
extraordinary labor leader he was at a
time when unions were much more
important in American life than they are
now and what a brilliant labor leader
and organizer he was and he basically
brought the Teamsters made the teams
there's a national labor power he did he
brought many many hundreds of thousands
of people from from the lower classes to
the middle classes he was the best-known
labor figure in the country in the 50s
and 60s and he was widely widely loved
by the members of his Union so even he
was really one of the most important
figures in American labor in 20th
century in the twentieth century but
that all gets lost because of these
other connections he had okay and I
gather his connection to the mob was
subordinate to his aspirations as a
labor leader in other words he wanted to
he kind of unified the Teamsters
nationally right he knitted it all
together more than it had been into a
single cohesive thing and there were
local chapters that were already
connected to the mob pretty deeply is
that the deal so if he wanted to do that
he had to deal with the mob
yeah but yes that's there are a couple
of ways in which he was connected to the
mob one was when he tried to expand his
power outside of Detroit there were lots
of you'd local unions in Chicago and in
New York especially there were already
mob controlled and so in order to get
their support both for becoming
president of the Teamsters and for his
national contract he had to do business
with them now I have to say Hoffa didn't
care that they were criminals for him
that's where the power was and he felt
he had to deal with them and he had no
compunction about making deals to
achieve his larger ends so in that sense
he was he was he didn't care about
conventional morality or law but on the
other hand
he wasn't particularly beholden to the
mob either I mean he did business with
them just like any power center he found
on his way to achieving his successes
whether it's the government or judges or
you know individual politicians so he
found them he found them where they were
and he dealt with him in those terms now
later on he also had more involved
relationships with them when he was
loaning money from the Teamsters pension
fund and they were very interested in
getting the the many many millions tens
of millions probably hundreds of
millions of dollars in loans from the
Teamsters pension fund over you know the
ten years that he was in charge of it so
and again he was making a lot of money
on the side off of that which in some
sense he was using to expand his power
and the Teamsters power he wasn't using
it for personal ends but he was heavily
involved in those senses with the mob
right so he kind of helped build Las
Vegas because he loaned a lot of money
to the mob to build casinos which was
attractive to the mob because more but
you know respectable banks didn't really
want to deal with him right correct and
he actually did I mean he was probably
the person most responsible for Ana
financing Las Vegas and yes they
couldn't get loans from elsewhere Hoffa
actually drove a pretty hard bargain and
he often said no
he definitely learned them a lot of
money to build casinos and then he took
a little off the top I mean technically
he might have thought of it as a service
fee but it can be seen as taking money
from the pension fund right because
those casinos would have been you know I
mean whatever they paid him in total is
what they would have been willing to pay
and it seems to me he had some kind of
obligation to put it all back in the
Teamsters fund but in Hindman right note
and no doubt it's worse than that
he charged them fifty thousand dollars
just to consider an application that
money went straight into his pocket and
if he said no that you didn't get your
money back he and any had points on the
loan so he was skimming some off the top
say it was it was in no way lawful and
it can be seen as taking money that
should have gone to the Union on the
other hand and this is no way to justify
or excuse that his corruption in those
forms was widely known within the union
and the union members vast the vast
majority of them said we don't care if
Jimmy get some on the side because he's
taking such good care of us so there was
a kind of devil's bargain within the
Teamsters Union at least between the
rank and file and Hoffa and one thing I
realized in reading the book is how its
kind of I mean there's a couple of ways
is not surprising you'd wined he'd
wanted to put mob connections one of
which we mentioned the other thing is
that when he came up in unions it was a
rough-and-tumble business I mean
physical force was being deployed on
both sides and and so he you know he he
was a tough guy who was who was willing
to see some arms broken from the
beginning right yes but that's what she
just said is very important he came up
in the Union he became a union leader in
the 1930s which was by far the roughest
time for unions in American history and
he very early on unions were hated and
they were in some places unlawful in the
early 30s and unions when they attempted
to form were often met with violence
violence by the police violence by by
companies and
was in that context that Hoffa learned
to deploy violence and it was in that
context that he basically established
his values and his attitude towards the
government in law that he held for the
rest of his life which is basically this
is all they're using law and
the police to hurt us it's us against
them
and I'm gonna use every tool I can to
fight back and he really believed that I
mean it was an opportunistic way of
looking at things but he really really
believed it and he and he had the
bruises and broken arms and and stitches
to show it and there's a version of his
cynicism about law enforcement and
Chucky's your stepfathers cynicism that
you I mean just to this is uh just kind
of a trailer for the next conversation
with you in a way but that you came to
to buy into to some extent is that well
yes in some extent and we it's a longer
conversation but yes there's a sense in
which they believe that the government
dealt in double standards that had a
different standard for the people it was
enforcing the law against and a
different different standard for its own
compliance with the law and there was an
element of truth in that and I don't I
don't want to exaggerate it but there
was an element of truth in that and I
saw it too both in my historical studies
and when I was in the government yes
okay so Hoffa comes up you know from a
labor a true labor background now your
your stepfather Chucky had a different
kind of background he was you know born
into a milieu that involved the mob
right yes he was born in Kansas City he
had lots of relatives who were senior
members in the Kansas City Sicilian
crime family and that was the world in
which he was raised he was half Irish
and half Sicilian his mother was
Sicilian it was on his mother's side
obviously that he was related to the
Kansas City mobsters and he essentially
his dad left when he was young when he
was seven years old he barely knew his
dad his mother was the authority figure
in his life from a very young age he
completely absorbed her value
and the values of the men that she knew
who basically ran the organized crime in
Kansas City including a me so that was
his and that was his identity his
essential identity had an Irish last
name but that was his essential identity
his whole life and your mother put him
in touch with his mother put him in
touch with Jimmy Hoffa his mother moved
to Detroit in the probably the late 30s
early 1940s she met Hoffa it's not
actually clear how she met Hoffa I
speculate on how she did she was working
for organized crime figures in Detroit
and I think it was through a man named
Burt Brennan who was one of Hoffa senior
associates that she met Hoffa she and
Hoffa immediately hit it off she was a
tough woman she did a lot of union
organizing and she committed the
conventional wisdom is and I believe
it's true and Chuckie explained it to me
is that she was the one that actually
introduced Hoffa to the orc Italian
organized crime figures in Detroit so
then that's and she also at about the
same time introduced Tophet to Chucky
okay and then Chucky at a fairly young
age comes to be in a certain sense off
his right-hand man not in the sense of
being a chief of staff but but in a
certain sense right what was his
how did he come to to work for - what
was the the nature of the relationship
yeah so Chucky idolized Hoffa from the
moment he met him when he was 9 as best
I can tell Chucky idolized Hoffa the
same way I idolized Chucky he he loved
everything about him he loved his
outsized personality and he wanted to be
like him and his goal throughout his
teenage years was to be like Jimmy Hoffa
and he spent a lot of free time with
Hoffa especially out on the weekends and
by all accounts including Chucky's but
not only Chucky's Hoffa took a real
shine to Chucky and they were very close
it's not clear why it's not clear
whether it was a favor to Sylvia who was
doing so many favors for him or just
because he just fell in love with the
kid who didn't have a father but they
were very close so close by the way that
a lot of people including the FBI have
speculated over the decades that Chucky
was Havas illegitimate son
I don't think that's true I pretty
clearly showed that it wasn't true they
were very close so Chucky graduates from
high school he's 18 years old he didn't
go to college he starts driving a truck
in Kansas City but he really wants to be
a labor organizer like Jimmy Hoffa and
he starts bugging Hoffa about it and
Hoffa eventually agrees in the late 50s
to let him be basically an apprentice
labor organizer which Chucky does for a
few years working at the feet of some
famous old-timers in Detroit and he's
not very good at it he was never very
good at it
and obviously realized this it just
wasn't Chucky skill set to do the things
that one needed to actually organize
workers in a union but they were close
when Hoffa book and Chucky was spending
a lot of time traveling around with
Hafez Hafez and power and the Teamsters
he would basically go with him on
weekends everywhere Hoffa went and when
Hoffa became the president of the
Teamsters in 1957 Chucky was just 23 24
years old that evening after he won the
presidency he was at dinner with Hoffa
and his wife and Hoffa basically said
I'm making you the special assistant to
the general president which was a very
fancy sounding job for a 23 or 24 year
old Chucky was had mixed feelings about
it because he wanted to be an organizer
and not hafez gofer which gets to your
question what was his real role with
Hoffa basically he was hoppers factotum
is probably the right word but it was
more elaborate than that he did he was
the person always behalf aside who did
the things Hoffa needed done gathering
intelligence getting meals together
running messages getting him ready for
the day helping him dress putting him to
bed at night he was really his intimate
aide and he was always by his side so it
looked like to the outside world like he
had more of a consigliere role but in
fact he was just he was basically his
assistant in fact is it is it the
Godfather that you think overstates his
the power of his role is the Robert
Duvall character somewhat more elevated
professionally than Chucky was
he's quite significantly yes I mean
amazingly in the course of the research
for the book I came across an interview
with Puzo Mario who's a couple of weeks
after the Godfather was published and he
said that the Tom Hagen character was
based on this kid named O'Brien who was
always at Hoffa side in Detroit and
Chucky was nothing like Tom Hagen I mean
he was he was not Tom Hagen was a man
with you know good judgment who could
were help someone get out of a tight
spot who was informed about the
operation of the business and the like
and that was not Chuck his role but
Chuck he was in a position something
called a body man right like the
president is a so he's always with him
so they know a lot of stuff I mean I
would say Chucky's role was really in a
way more important than that because I
mean he was ideally suited in a couple
of senses right completely loyal to
Hoffa because by virtue is physician
Chuck he's gonna know where all the
bodies are buried he's gonna know a lot
of stuff completely loyal and he had a
deep connection to the mob which Hoffa
hadn't been born with in the way that
Chucky was right so so Chucky's position
is funny he can't be in the mob because
he's only half Sicilian but he does take
they do a little writ the mob does a
little ritual with him at some point to
drive home how important his fidelity to
them is going to be right yes yes all
that's true and the key is his mother so
about the same time he's trying to get a
job with as an organizer in the Union
his mother arranges for a kind of faux
ceremony initiation ritual with the
Italian family in Detroit it was nothing
more as Chuck he describes it than him
going to the back room in a restaurant
called Grecian Gardens in Detroit where
they used to hang out and they basically
asked him to reiterate his pledge to
America to which he had been which had
been drilled into him we haven't talked
yet about Anthony Giacalone II who was
the other father figure in chacas life
senior Detroit crime figure close to
Sylvia Pagano someone whom Chucky also
revered
basically as you say at age 18 Chucky
his sort of Sicilian identity and his
Sicilian values became sort of
concretize in this ritual that wasn't a
real mob ritual but that was basically a
way of saying you're one of us you play
by our rules and this was very important
also as you say because there was nobody
closer literally nobody closer to Hoffa
than Chucky Hoffa never this is one of
the many things that Chucky explained to
me that I didn't understand and that the
world didn't understand Hoffa never
really understood the mob and how it
worked he wasn't interested in all their
rituals he didn't hang out with him very
much at all other than Anthony
Jacqueline E and some Teamsters
officials who were in the mob and
Chucky's mother and then later Chucky
were really the intimate go-betweens in
a lot of office transactions oh you're
right he had this crucial role as what
many thought was Chuck was he was so
close to half of that people thought he
was his illegitimate son and he was also
very close and spent a lot of time with
these mob figures okay so let's talk
about the disappearance of Jimmy Hoffa
in 1975 just to fast-forward through
some stuff that we'll cover in more
depth in our next conversation Hoffa
Robert Kennedy had something of a an
obsession with Hoffa starting in the
late 50s trying to put him in prison and
and certainly he had committed crimes
but Kennedy had a hard time doing it and
they finally they finally put him away
this is when Kennedy as Attorney General
and his brother's administration they
finally they finally get him on a pretty
minor like a jury tampering thing not
not not the big mob related stuff but he
goes to prison he he comes out and he he
he well he disappears a couple of years
after he comes out and and maybe well in
a few minutes get a little more into all
that but but first why don't you tell us
what it seemed like to you when he
disappeared in 1975 I remember that it
was a big story and I was in high school
I wasn't paying a lot of attention to
news but
this story it was big yeah it was huge
I mean it was front page of the national
newspapers for weeks and weeks and and
the evening news as well I was in
Arkansas on a vacation with my mom it
was six weeks after they had married she
and Chuck he had married Chuck II was in
Detroit packing up his things and
getting ready to move to his new job in
Florida he had a new job at the
Teamsters official in Florida that's
where we were gonna move also and we
came back from fishing one day and my
grandmother who also knew Chucky and his
mom has got the person into his mom well
she kind of screamed mr. Hoffa is
missing this was the day after the
disappearance when the news but when it
became news I didn't I'd never heard the
name Jimmy Hoffa by that point I didn't
know who Hoffa was but over the next few
days there was a lot of anxiety and the
house Chucky wasn't there for the first
four or five days he wasn't considered
one of the suspects but then the
following Monday after the Wednesday all
the papers say Chucky's gone missing
he's fled his whereabouts weren't known
he was actually with us by that time in
West Memphis and then the FBI quickly
developed a theory not without a lot of
circumstantial evidence there was
reasons to suspect Rocky's involvement
at the time they quickly developed the
theory that he was involved and this was
front-page news
James James James Hoffa Hoffa Sun also
pointed the finger at Chucky so suddenly
within a week of the disappearance the
front page news and conventional wisdom
is that my stepfather was the person
that picked up off and drove him to his
death and it was wild it was wild just
because we had never experienced
anything like that my mom was not well
and her mental health issues went way
out of control and there's one scene
there's one point where she in you're in
the car there it comes on the radio yeah
Chucky's name suddenly he's on the radio
and I guess he's in the car and she's in
the car
she just starts screeching lost it yeah
but that was yes this was my mom had
many nervous breakdowns after the Hoffa
disappearance and went into she had lots
of shock treatments that fall and she
just went into a
down murder electric shock electroshock
therapy electroshock therapy 1970 style
I'm not an expert on this but it was
about the time that the Nicholson movie
came out and that's kind of the way I
remember it see and you know in the
middle of this was Chucky who I now
believe and I kind of believed at the
time but I didn't in the intervening
years necessarily was was innocent of
these charges and he was trying to deal
with them trying to deal with his new
family trying to keep my mom calm trying
to deal with the government I also
realized he was having to deal with the
mob that was putting pressure on him he
was going through unbelievable pressures
and it was kind of impacting our family
indirectly but he kind of shielded this
from it I mean I don't remember it I
remember it as a wild time and a bad
time for my mom but I still throughout
it all remember Chucky is this kind of
solid protecting figure strange as that
may seem yeah
now was the was the allegation at the
time that he had known when he picked
Huff up that he was driving him to his
death or that some mob guys had just
said hey Chucky can you pick up Jimmy
and and or was it even clear at the time
which was being alleged it was pretty
clear at the time and the theory came to
be that he was probably used as a dupe
the theory was based on we could talk
about it in tape detail if you want but
in in in brief there was a lot of
circumstantial evidence that pointed to
him being in the area at the time and
the FBI they could never figure out what
happened to Hoffa and it was always
assumed there's no evidence to support
this we just don't know it was always
assumed that he voluntarily got into a
car with someone and since he was so
close to Chucky it was always assumed
that he's one of the Chucky was one of
the few people Hoffa would get in a car
with it was also assumed that because
they were so close nobody thought that
Chucky would purposely do Hoffa harm
despite the fact that had a falling out
six months earlier so that the basic
theory for early on was that Chucky was
probably used as a dupe okay so before
we get to the details about the
the disappearance back to your life the
it's interesting to me it sounds to me
like you never doubted his innocence as
a child which you would kind of expect
from a son but on the other hand you
hadn't really known him that long and
that's what intrigues me you had known
him for six months but he had already
right you were just no he's my dad my
dad's and the right was kind of your
reaction right that's the way I remember
it I mean I didn't it's it's again it's
hard to capture and explain but he had
been in my life for almost seven months
by the time of the disappearance it's
very hard for me to exaggerate how close
we had become and how much I just come
to idolize him in that period I can't
really reconstruct it I mean I'd ever
had a father and my mom wasn't well I
imagine that I just you know fell in
love with him basically so by the time
the disappearance happens seven months
later I'm on his side and I'm trying to
predict you know and also it's kind of
our family against the world at that
point
and I basically you know I was 12 years
old I was almost 13 I just believed
everything he said I mean I knew all
these mob guys I met you know Anthony
Giacalone II was Uncle Tony to me he was
a very violent guy but to me he was this
upstanding wonderful gentleman who took
care of us Anthony provenzano Uncle Tony
Pro same thing I kind of believed Chucky
without really thinking about it when he
said the mob doesn't exist it's all
the government makes it up when
he said I had nothing to do with the
disappearance I believed him he always
spoke about Hoffa in reverential loving
terms so the picture for me the truth is
I wasn't very self-reflective about it
but the picture was I basically adopted
his worldview and believed him that
makes sense yeah it makes it does make
sense as I said the only surprising
thing is is kind of the immediacy of the
bond between you and your father I mean
if somebody you know I mean I was you
know when I was 12 my father was in the
Army we were living on the preceeding of
San Francisco there were all these
demonstrators
basically saying my father was evil
because it was during Vietnam no that
was an easy call my father wasn't evil
but but I had known him for like 12
years and I mean I think it's almost
kind of a testament to Chucky's love or
something that that seven months is a
long time I think I ever I was 12 years
old it was seven months that I had known
him and you know by that point I was
completely in his arms so to speak and
it was basically we were and also that's
the first time that we had ever had some
strange as it seems for those seven
months we kind of had a normal family we
had a real father who was loving to us
we did fun things together it was just
you know it was that in some ways it was
the happiest part of my life to that
point before the Hoffa disappearance so
I really wasn't in a position to turn on
a dime if you see it I mean and when you
say he taught you right from wrong that
of course will will surprise some people
given his you know pretty close
connections to the mob and his his his
countenancing of the kind of stuff the
mob does but but it was basically the
value system was it that say I'm the
Andy Griffith Show and II would have
imparted Opie or something I mean I
again this came later yeah but you know
he was very frowned a lot on drugs he
frowned a lot on drinking he frowned a
lot on screwing around as he put it
they were basically Hoffa's values that
he had absorbed Hoffy Hoffa didn't drink
and frowned on people who had
extramarital affairs yes he did he was
highly moralistic and Chucky was
strangely highly moralistic as well and
you know I was growing up in Fort
Lauderdale there were many temptations
around a lot of my friends were
indulging them and I didn't and that's
because I didn't want to disappoint
Chucky is not something that that he
would have abided okay so a part of the
story that I think is sounds like he's
still a little emotionally traumatic for
you is and we'll get back to the
disappearance again but of Hoffa and the
evidence and so on but you go to college
at Washington and Lee
and at some point you you pretty much
disowned Chucky you had been using his
last name O'Brien and you change your
name to what it is now the last name of
your birth father right so it was it was
a process but when I got to college just
before I went to college I'm Chucky and
I were closer than we'd ever been I
stopped by to see him in prison he was
in prison for nine months on my way to
visit Washington and Lee when I was in
high school now he was in prison for
what because that was the thing that was
appealed to the Supreme Court and no
that was a different one he was that
well we could talk about that when we
get to surveillance but this was so
after the disappearance when the when
the FBI could not they ran out of clues
they as they always do and it's an old
and legitimate technique they basically
try to find other crimes on the suspects
to put pressure on them all the other
suspects went to jail for a very long
time and they could only put Chucky away
for nine months it turned out but he
hadn't done much wrong and it was kind
of kind of charges that he
wouldn't have been indicted on had they
not you know really pushed to find
something but anyway he spent nine
months in prison and we just before I
went to college so I go to college and
you know basically my world starts to
change I started to become interested
interested in education and ideas I
start to become embarrassed by his Union
identity when he comes to Washington Lee
and he's you know I've become friends
with these professors who were these
highly educated people and I'm getting
interested in in those things and Chucky
comes along and he doesn't speak very
well and he doesn't look great and I
just became embarrassed by him and I
also started at the same time to worry
about his impact on my life I talk about
a lot of scene in the book when Chucky
had given me a car to use in college and
one day my sophomore year this very
enormous man came and basically
possessed the took the car from this
case Chuck he hadn't paid hadn't paid
off the note and that was a very scary
scene and that really frightened me and
made me think that hanging around with
Chuck he might not be so good for me
and then most importantly I think I
started reading the books about the
Hoffa disappearance for the first time
and kind of understanding what the mob
was about what my uncle Tony's were
about uncle's Tony were about what
Chucky's criminal history was and that
scared me also and then finally I
started to think about my career as a
lawyer I had ambitions to be a lawyer so
all of these things and I thought that
you know wouldn't be so great without
really fully understanding I kind of
surmised that it wouldn't be so great to
have as a stepfather the leading suspect
in the disappearance and to have these
associations with all these mobsters so
over the course of seven years one
important point of which was as you say
I changing my name after I graduated
from college I had been Jack O'Brien for
about eight or nine years and I changed
my name back to my birth name
soon after I graduated from college we
had that exchange of letters in the book
where basically I said to him I tried to
present it in an upbeat way like it was
no big deal and it was absolutely
devastating to him as he made clear to
me and then the letter he wrote back to
you was incredibly kind of warm and
understanding in a certain sense I think
it was I mean he didn't hide his pain
and disappointment but he also basically
said he loved me in ways that I can't
really capture it was a nine page letter
he explained how much he loved me and he
said you have to make your own decisions
you're an adult now I hope you make the
right decisions but basically I always
love you and you'll always be my son and
you know when I read this letter now I
can hardly or talk about it I have a
hard time not crying about it but as a
21 year old it just didn't move me at
all I was really just thinking about
myself and my future and not really
about him
anyway over the next couple of years I
continued to distance myself until
finally basically in law school I had to
stop talking to him and basically didn't
for almost 20 years okay you do you do
have a kind of a reproach mom and I
guess in a certain sense this book is
part of that I mean you're
is that is that fair to say yeah I mean
yes I when I left the government jumping
ahead for a whole bunch of reasons I had
decided what I had done to Chucky was
wrong and this is a process of
reflection over many many months
probably a year and so I when I said
when I saw him the next time after I
figured all this stuff out I asked him
to forgive me and I apologized for
basically blowing him off and being mean
to him for twenty years which I then
appreciated I had my own children at the
time I then appreciated how awful it
must have been for him even though I
should have done that 20 years earlier
he accepted me back into his life
without question we grew close again in
many ways closer than ever of the next
four or five years and over the course
of talking about his life just casually
I came to think that maybe in fact he
wasn't involved in the Hoffa
disappearance and I thought I offered to
write a book to give him a fair shake
than history had given him it's
impossible to exaggerate what a bad turn
he's been given by history with all the
untruths that ascribed to him and yeah I
did it kind of as an act of atonement I
didn't had no idea what I was gonna find
or what was gonna come out of the book
but I basically initially set out to try
to figure out what happened and to cut
through the crap so to speak about
behalf of disappearance and see what his
real involvement was and see what I can
learn about the disappearance and yes I
did it as an act of to kind of make up
in part for those 20 years okay so let's
talk about the disappearance
um the I mean I should say there's a
there's a scene where at the
rapprochement he kind of starts crying
right when you apologize or at least his
desire I mean it was I mean it was we
were watching Seinfeld and I without any
we spent a couple of days together for
the first time in 20 years and just like
the good old days we shop together we
cooked together he was taking care of my
children it was great and he was so
happy he was just over the moon happy
and then at the end of those two days I
basically said I'm so sorry for what I
did and I hope you can forgive me and he
looked at me
he was sitting he was not well even then
and he was sitting in his chair and he
looked at me with a puzzled I will never
forgive this it kind of kind of puzzled
look on his face and his eyes were
hollow and they started watering and he
was started crying and he basically said
you don't have to apologize and I know
why you did what you did
and it's okay that's amazing you still
feel a little guilty about it it sounds
like more than a little yeah well if
it's any consolation a lot of kids in
their teens in college years around that
time come to be embarrassed about their
parents with much less grounds I know
some people say I've beaten myself to it
up too much in the book but I was really
being to him he never did anything wrong
to me he was only did good things to me
there were lots of intermediate steps I
could have taken to distance myself from
him in two
besides blowing him off and I was really
mean to him I mean I don't know if you
remember in the book when I reproduced
the FBI interview and I was getting my
first security clearance I really tossed
him under the bus and said some very
mean things about him so I feel fully
justified and feeling bad about it it
was more than the usual separation of
son from father and the distancing that
goes on if it'll make you feel better to
feel guilty then go ahead I mean I kind
of over it now in the sense that I've
you know I've been through it but I mean
I did it it's very hard to see what I
did to him and even in any other terms
then less than a verbal well it was a
weird situation you're in the so so the
the disappearance so Hoffa Bobby Kennedy
finally so he goes to prison he gets out
of prison and by the way apparently is
is this the right way to put it he gets
out of prison we think because Hoffa
pays Richard Nixon a million dollars and
in effect and Chucky delivers the
million dollars is that is that the in
effect kind of a bride is that too
simple no that's his daughter what
happened that was
all of it I mean I have a whole chapter
on this and the imaginations of the Hoff
excuse me of the Nixon White House were
just unbelievably impressive in a
completely corrupt way they got a
million dollars from Hoffa they also put
a condition on his release that kept him
from taking over the Union they kept
their guy Frank Fitzsimmons in the
Teamsters Union so Krista Frank
Fitzsimmons was also giving them tons of
money to help with reelection and tons
of political support so the whole thing
was completely corrupt and Hoffa knew
about the condition on it he was
desperate he was I think he was losing
his mind and he was desperate to get out
of prison he would have done anything to
get out of prison and the Nixon team
pushed him to the very edge and getting
everything they could out of him but
yeah that's basically what happened so
he gets out of prison but it he looks
like he's not going to be able to regain
his position as president of the temp
Teamsters he nonetheless starts thinking
of ways that he could do that and he he
starts meanwhile the mob doesn't want
him to become president because Frank
Fitzsimmons is if anything more
compliant than Hoffa was from the mobs
point of view right and in fact in fact
the Teamsters get kind of more mobbed up
under Fitzsimmons than under Hoffa right
significantly more armed up I mean
different in kind mobbed up as I said
again this is one of the things I
learned in writing the book that's not
known Hoffa had extensive dealings with
the mob but if they were armed literally
arm's length transactions he was as
Chucky said to me mr. Hoffa was in
charge of the loans and he often said no
and you can tell from these tapes that
are from these illegal recordings that I
guess we can talk about later about when
the government was was bugging the mob
you can see that they're desperate to
get these loans and there and that Havas
in charge and he's taking some on the
side and he often says no so this is one
of the great ironies and Bobby Kennedy
thought that decapitating taking Hoffa
how the Teamsters would eliminate the
mob and exactly the opposite
and the mob took over literally took
over when Hoffa went away cuz did
Simmons was completely weak and didn't
care
so when Hoffa gets out of jail and tries
to get the Union back mohab is doesn't
want him back there
they're gorging on the on the pension
buns like never before and they don't
want Hoffa to mess that up yeah I mean
this is an aside but we're taping this a
couple of days after the head of Isis
was killed
and this also often happens with it
happens with crime it happens with
terrorism sometimes they remove the head
and things get even worse because the
whoever takes over is less disciplined
or something anyway that's what happened
here yeah so so and Hoffa as part of his
maneuverings
I guess he starts talking about the
Teamsters connection to the mob and we
think that this is ultimately why he was
killed right correct
he starts Chucky says he lost his mind
and that's because this is completely
this is something Chucky could never
imagined Hoffa starts first in private
and then in public hinting that he's
gonna reveal but let me back up he's at
the point where he doesn't think he can
get his Union back and he's it's not
clear why he was making these threats my
theory is he was he couldn't get the
Union back so he's gonna bring everyone
down I think he was just it reached that
point in any event he starts talking
publicly an increasingly an increasingly
threatening way and an increasingly
credible way about basically revealing
all the mob ties with the Teamsters
Union and Hoffa knew everything and if
he had talked and he and it was widely
believed that he was talking to the
government even though he wasn't I was
able to track that down if he had talked
it would have exposed everything I mean
he could have exposed everything and the
mob freaked out not to put too fine a
point on it nationally across the
country this amazing cash cow that they
had and this amazing arrangement that
they had was suddenly completely in
jeopardy and now you could you could
impute a kind of a tactical
motivation right I mean if he thought
that look the mob can get whatever it
wants right I mean right now it's
technically illegal for me to be
president but if the mob really got
behind me we could probably work this
out with the Nixon administration
whatever maybe he thought that any and
he's saying to them look I'll shut up if
I'm president but until then I won't
that would kind of make sense right it
kind of makes sense except for one big
problem the mob had no way of lifting
this Nixon condition it was the Nixon
condition that stood in the way the
condition on the commutation of his
sentence that's what stood in the way of
him regaining control the Teamsters
Union and yes I mean you know maybe he
thought if I can get the mob to support
me we can get rid of Fitzsimmons and I
can have someone in there that I can
control and I can be back in charge de
facto maybe that was his thinking it's
very hard to piece together I tried very
hard and it's very hard to understand
what he was thinking but the mob did not
have the power to put him back in charge
and that was there was a legal Bert
there was a legal bar on that that the
mob could not have helped him with him
by that time it was Watergate Nixon was
gone you had the more virtuous Justice
Department and the more virtuous
president in Ford and Edward levy so
there was no chance that the mob could
have gotten rid of that bar and gotten
him back and all of a said in fact now I
talk about this also in the book that
the four Justice Department almost put
Hoffa back in jail for for violating the
condition on his pardon so he couldn't
have gotten around that that hurdle
although the optimist I mean the mob was
a separate problem for him right I mean
if the legal restrictions had been
relaxed he still would have had a
problem because of the mobs influence
with the Teamsters so the mob was an
obstacle to be overcome but for whatever
reason he is talking pretty wildly he
starts writing a book that I think did
come out where basically he he says
Frank Fitzsimmons the current president
Teamsters did a B and C much of which
were things that Hoffa had himself
actually done with the mob right yeah
exactly I mean it off uh sounded like
Bobby Kennedy talking about Hoffa when
he
talking about Frank Fitzsimmons yes I
mean everything he accused Fitzsimmons
of doing was stuff that Hoffa did maybe
with more arm's length and maybe with
more distance from the mob but yes okay
so it's not surprising that they'd want
to kill him and in fact there was an
effort that Chucky was kind of part of
to talk some sense to him to get him to
quiet down
Chuck Chuck he was told by I guess one
of the uncle Tony's it would have been
jackal Oni right to try to you know
quiet him down talk some sense to him
Jack alone he visited him repeatedly and
Jack alone he's like a true mob figure
and he didn't quiet down you would think
it's not clear but you would think at
some point somebody would have said look
Jimmy we're gonna kill you if you don't
shut up but it's not clear than anybody
ever put it like that Chuck he never put
it like that and he says that Jack alone
he never put it like that let me just
say one thing
Hoffa had known Jack Aloni for 35 years
they were friends and they had done a
lot of business together so this wasn't
some he was the one person in the mob
that Hoffa was close to and this was
also Chuckie second father so it's a
very intimate circle that we're talking
about here it's it's clear I mean Chucky
says that even though Jack alone II
never said if you don't shut up we're
gonna kill you he never put it that way
he made very clear to him what the
stakes were and with those visits out
there you know as Chucky says basically
uncle Tony wasn't going out there to
talk to mr. Hoffa just for the fun of it
he was going out there to tell him about
life so to speak
I don't know Bucky wasn't privy to most
of those conversations he net he doesn't
know exactly what Jacqueline he said he
said that mostly Jack lonely talked and
Hoffa listened it's pretty clear what
the message was Chuckie describes it as
what can we do for you to get you to
shut up is there anything you want you
want to be the head of a corporation how
much money do you want they would have
offered him anything and they did offer
him a lot apparently and a half of what
and one thing back he wanted the
Teamsters Union back that's fascinating
so what happens as far as the
disappearance is he has a meeting he's
supposed to meet with Tony Giacalone II
outsider
strong it off a is it's unclear if it
was set for 2:00 or 2:30 but in any
event he goes there and nobody shows up
for quite a while which and this to me
is one of the great mysteries of this I
mean my own rule of thumb is never show
up late for a mob hit unless you're the
target didn't like her I agree it's what
I think it's one of the that there are
many many mysteries about what happened
that afternoon the first one as you say
is first of all Hoffa himself was
confused about whether the meeting was
at 2:00 or 2:30 he had written down 2:30
on the note to himself but he acted all
day like the thought the meeting was it
- he shows up there and he basically
waits in the parking lot for 90 minutes
75 to 90 minutes we can't reconstruct
her perfectly we're probably 90 minutes
a lot of people see him in the parking
lot waiting out in the parking lot Hoffa
is not the kind of person that would
have waited according to Chucky five
minutes for a meeting if someone was
late so it was a hugely important
meeting he thought something important
was gonna happen there why the people
who were gonna kill him waited 90
minutes what they were thinking what
that theory was these are all mysteries
that we have no answer to what so ever
but Hoffa did wait he made a couple of
phone calls one to his wife at about I
think it was 2:45 to say if you heard
from Tony exactly where the hell is he
and then he called a guy named Louie
lento who is an associate of his at 3:30
that was the last time he was heard from
he basically said I'm going home to have
dinner with Josephine nobody showed up
and that's the last we know about Jimmy
how awful
Josephine is his wife yeah sorry
and then Chuckie apparently just had the
misfortune of being connected to a lot
of circumstantial evidence that would
suggest that he was the guy who who
picked him up right why did it look like
he was the best candidate so there was a
lot of things that pointed to him
although upon reflection some of the
things that pointed to him also made it
improbable it he'd be actually the guy
so there are a lot of things I'll just
list them
at the very part that the same parking
lot where Hoffa disappeared
Chucky for about a week including the
morning of the disappearance and the
morning after the disappearance since he
didn't have a car since he was broke he
was waiting in that very parking lot of
all the places in Michigan
he was waiting at that very parking lot
to get a ride and he had been doing that
for a week so he was there both the
morning of the disappearance and the
morning after this parents sitting in
the corner waiting for a ride the day of
the disappearance he was downtown at the
Teamsters at local 299 basically with
nothing to do this is all documented in
the FBI files and he got a phone and a
frozen fish a frozen salmon from Alaska
shows up at the Teamsters offices to be
delivered to a man named Bobby Holmes
who is a Teamsters executive Bobby
Holmes was out of town
Chucky's volunteers to take the fish to
his wife he knew the homes as well it's
a big fish it's like a 24 pound scene
it's a huge salmon and it is leaking
leaking something that looks remarkably
like blood right blood blood yeah it is
blood although there's a funny story
about that that I learned late and we
can talk about later um so so Chucky it
doesn't have a car he's broke he can't
run a car so he borrows a car who's he
bar whose car does he borrow one of his
closest and oldest friends the son of
Anthony Jacqueline Dean a guy named Joey
de Cluny and we should say Anthony
Giacalone he almost certainly is
involved in the killing right I think he
has to be Chucky told me a lot of things
but he would never say a word to suggest
that Tony was involved but clearly he
was he had a perfect alibi for the day
he was involved in trying to ass way
tougher four weeks before he pretty
clearly was the man in Detroit who was
the spokesperson for the National I
think for the national organization and
trying to getting half of the compound
part of his alibi was manufactured he
asked Chuckie to lie for him about who
did I started alive for him and but he
acted a lie for him and to talk to
reporters to tell to support his alibi
yes
in any event Chuckie takes this
salmon and we know he took it because
this is all corroborated to the homes
home to the to the to the wife of the
man who the salmon was delivered to
spills blood all over her kitchen floor
she's mad at him he chats with her right
up until the you know just aimlessly
chit-chatting as if you know nothing
better to do in the world right up until
the time 220 to 230 when Hoffa was when
Hoffa thought the meeting was supposed
to take place and then he leaves so that
both you to 22 to 30 he's at by Holmes's
house having delivered the salmon in the
car of the mobster who's the leading
suspect the son of the leading suspect
then there is a period of time of a
couple of hours when Chucky there's no
one who saw Chucky no one can verify
Chucky's whereabouts and the FBI
believes that he went from by Holmes's
house to the Marcus red fox where Hoffa
was he picked off according to
instructions that they believe he got
that day
and he took him to his killers that's
the theory it's always been the theory
and and it was thought that Chucky that
Hoffa would have gotten in the car with
Chucky there are a couple of other
pieces of evidence they the FBI later
found Hoffa sent in the car and the the
most damning piece of evidence was that
they found when they picked up the car
nine days after the disappearance they
found a hair in the car that was later
matched to the office okay so that's
among this circumstantial evidence and
by the way you said the FBI believes I
mean as well as we'll discuss the FBI
really no longer believes in fact that
that Chucky did it I think it's fair to
say but but we'll get to that the so
your so then what's the evidence that
you consider exonerating so there's a
lot of it I mean a lot of the case in
favor of Chucky is circumstantial just
like the
evidence against them I'll just list
some of it the whole thing is improbable
that that the in the in the hit of the
century the the mob would get Chucky to
go in the car of the suspect of the son
of the leading suspect the I who set it
up to pick up Hoffa in those
circumstances the timeline as I
explained the appendix when you actually
look at the last time when Hoffa was
known to be alive and Chucky's known
whereabouts that back at the Teamsters
office an hour later makes it and I was
actually very generous in that timeline
makes it practically impossible for
Chucky to have had time to picked up
Hoffa the early FBI investigators
focused in my judgment on the wrong
timeline the reason just to jump ahead a
bit that I started to try to reconstruct
this timeline I was able to get a bunch
of grand jury information and one of the
FBI investigators who did not believe
Chucky was involved told me once that it
was impossible that Chucky had time to
pick up off and take him to his death
based on his known whereabouts that's
what led me to reconstruct the timeline
haha Chucky alone among the suspects
talked to the FBI twice at length to try
to clear his name he never would have
been allowed to do that if he had been
the person who picked him up he wouldn't
be alive if he were the person that
picked him up there are much of other
improbabilities about having Chucky
involved the most damning piece of
evidence and the thing I couldn't figure
out an explanation for and the reason I
still had a bit of suspicion was the
hair in the car and the scent in the car
and now this was there was a nine day
period after Hoffa disappeared until
they picked up the car so who knows what
could have happened in those intervening
nine days one of the strange things was
that the car was a mess there had been
no effort to clean up the car to get rid
of incriminating evidence
Chucky his fingerprints were all over
the car there were no half of
fingerprints but they did find this hair
and they did find this scent now I later
learned that the reason the FBI they had
a whole bunch of other reasons which we
can talk about to think that he didn't
wasn't involved because they developed
because of all the reasons I just
suggested and later when they
eventually conclude he probably didn't
do it right but they think that the read
the way the scent and the hair got in
the car this is speculation was and when
I discovered this in the FBI files it
was like such an aha moment when Anthony
Giacalone II was out at the lake and his
many visits to Hoffa in the week before
though in 10 days before the
disappearance on one of those visits and
this is in this is a little bit
technical but it was in Josephine hafez
report to the FBI
she asked these are all old friends she
asked Anthony Jacqueline II and his
brother Vito to help Hoffa pick up a rug
that was in his basically his workout
room to carry the rug and place it and
lay it down in another room in the house
which and she talks about him getting on
his hands and knees and spreading out
the rug and it's almost certain amid
that some of the thought there would
have been many thousands of hafez hairs
on that rug and that some of them would
have been transferred to Jacqueline II
and that he might have transferred that
hair and the scent to the car when he
was in the car later that in the week
after that that's the best explanation
is pure speculation I don't have any no
way to prove that but we know that he
did lay that that rug and we know about
hair transfer theory so that is what the
FBI concluded as to how the hair and the
scent got in the car and then finally
and again there's more more holes in the
circumstantial case but finally they
developed reasons to think that they
didn't believe that Chuckie would be
alive if he had in talked to be able to
talk to him if he had been involved and
then later they developed breezes
distinct think starting in the 1990s
that it was someone else entirely who
did it and that was the final reason
that they came to believe Chuckie wasn't
involved I mean it certainly doesn't
seem that you know if you're doing the
mob hit Tony Giacalone you almost
certainly knew about it says hey why
don't you use my son's car you know and
you know and like hey I've got time to
deliver a salmon before I pick you up
and if traffic's okay it'll work it all
those things and also the fact that he
didn't have a care in the world and he
was hanging out talking to
homes and he didn't act strangely at all
that afternoon for the people who saw
him that afternoon and evening nor did
he act strangely the next morning he was
just going about his life with seeming
to be normal until he finds out that
Hoffa disappeared and then his whole
attitude changes yeah now so the FBI one
of the most frustrating parts of the
book is that the FBI is repeatedly
poised to go public with their new
opinion or at least it looks like
they're gonna be occupied just because
correct you on that they weren't poised
to go public with their new opinion they
were poised to and they invited Chuckie
to to talk to them so they could
basically say you're not a target or
subject basically exonerate him so they
were poised to clear him I don't think
that they were in a position then to
reveal what they know I think they will
one day but but it was really too clear
Chuckie not to tell talk about the new
theory but there is one point where you
think you have assurance from either the
FBI or the Justice Department more
broadly that if Chuckie I'll sit down
from meeting then they'll issue a letter
exonerating him and that doesn't happen
I didn't think I had the assurance I
knew it I had it in writing and it was a
very unusual thing to do the FBI had
been inviting Chuckie since the 90s
since they realized that he probably
wasn't involved they did this is not
known to the public of course they've
been inviting him to come and sit down
with them and tell his version of events
and that if he told the truth he was
told they would basically exonerate him
send they'll give him a letter saying
you're not a target or subject to the
investigation he didn't do this for 10
years because he didn't trust the FBI
when I came on the scene in the 2000s
one of the first things I did when he
told me about this was good or Detroit
and talk to these folks I was suspicious
also I didn't think they could be
trusted because to go to a meeting and
to talk to them they could have been a
perjury trap they could have been
double-crossing him most of the people
that advised me said don't do it we did
it anyway
he went and he spoke to and we had again
representations from the US Attorney's
Office in from the
the eye that if he told the truth he
would be received this letter he talked
for four hours it was an amazing event
actually his four hours of answering
their questions he told the truth about
everything he wasn't in good shape when
he did it he was in poor health when we
walked out of there I thought wow he did
great actually and I thought that was
amazing and they were all kind of amazed
and happy the the agents in the room a
week later we heard that he did well
they thought he told the truth a couple
of weeks later we heard that the US
Attorney's Office had agreed to send in
the letter and then delay set in and
delay and delay and delay and it ended
up being eight or nine months of delay
before they finally announced that they
weren't going to give him the letter
after all so this was disappointing to
put it mildly but he must be happy with
the this book and the reception it's
gotten it's been very favorably reviewed
right so is this a is this a nice moment
for him it's that's a complicated
question do you want the one-minute
version of the four-minute version let's
go let's go for 2:45 okay basically he's
had deeply ambiguous feelings about this
book since we started he wanted to clear
his name desperately he knows he didn't
do it he thought I could help him do
that and I think I do do that frankly
but I also told him when I started the
book I've got to be truthful you've got
to tell me the truth I've got to figure
out the truth and I'm gonna report the
truth and he doesn't understand the need
for a credible book and the riether need
to write a book in which you tell the
truth in a way that the truth doesn't
always run in favor of your favorite
people being beautiful and nice and
truth-telling in any event so I knew
there were some things in the book he
wouldn't like he wouldn't like my
portrayal necessarily of his role in the
Union he wouldn't like some of the
things I said about what he told me
about the mob to make a long story short
he was anxious about the book during the
run-up to it and when he but basically
him again just cut to the chase
two days after the book came out when
some of the nice reviews came out
saying it looks like Chucky's didn't do
it saying that Chucky was this honorable
man in a strange eccentric way I got a
call from him one day and he was in
tears and this is not a man he's a tough
guy and he's not prone to tears
he had never thanked me for all the work
I'd done which I didn't expect he never
said wow thank you for doing all that
and I wasn't my main concern in
publishing the book was that he would
hate it and he would feel like I you
know showed him to be dishonorable
because of the some of the things he
told me in the lock well in this
conversation he was in tears and he said
I read the book three times very
carefully I can't believe how you
figured all that stuff out I can't
believe that you got so much right it's
all right that you when you put down as
he said and he was just deeply thankful
he was just deeply deeply grateful in a
way he's never been in our relationship
he's never expressed himself to me like
that and then he apologized for being
what he called a huge pain in the ass
because he was a huge pain in the ass in
the writing of this book in terms of
just deflecting my questions not wanting
to answer questions understandably I
understood why so in any event I think
he's okay with the book I think he's
happy with it yeah now there is you say
he was a pain in the ass I mean I guess
you're partly referring to his
allegiance to the code of omerta that
the idea that you don't talk about the
deep secrets of the Mafia you don't you
don't sell out mafia members even though
again he wasn't technically a member but
you you think he knows things he knows
more about the disappearance of Hoffa
then he's told you now at one moment and
he later I guess regrets this but he
kind of blurts out something to the
effect that Anthony Provenzano
a New York mob guy was he New Jersey New
Jersey okay
knew was involved right there is
separate from that good reason to
believe Anthony Giacalone II who was a
Detroit mob guy was involved in though
he doesn't say that but anyway later
kind of regret saying what
he did say there's one thing that that
puzzled me at the near the end you say
he tells you he knows more than he's
told you and you say that you think you
think he means he knows why Hoffa was
killed but not necessarily who did it
but I thought we kind of knew broadly
speaking why Hoffa was killed right that
the mob
he was freaking out the mob if there's a
lot of detail that we don't know I mean
sorry finish your question sorry no no
just on the one so on the one hand
there's that question I have and on the
other hand there's the hint that
actually he does know more about
specific people's involvement that was
the sense I had gotten earlier in the
book then he's told you so just yeah
that's my wish okay so this is I don't
know the answer to these questions and I
try to leave it a bit mysterious in the
book well let me explain so Chuck he
told me a ton about the lead-up to the
disappearance that's I believe is true
it's certainly credible about all the
machinations going on in the with Hoffa
and Jacqueline Lee and the like and in
the run-up to it he also told me enough
- and I think credibly so to make me
believe that he wasn't involved and that
to give me a sense of how he was in this
terrible terrible vice he knew a ton
about what happened in the sense that
why it was happening who was involved in
some sense what the concerns were the
moment he heard Hoffa didn't come home
that night he knew immediately what
happened and he probably knew in general
who was involved so he knew all of those
things and he hung out with the jackal
oneis for the 20 you know the next 10 or
20 years I don't believe for a whole
bunch of reasons and he said that they
didn't ever tell him what actually
happened that afternoon I don't think
they would have trusted him with that
information he told me he wouldn't have
wanted to know because it would have
been a death sentence but there's a lot
of facts that can be filled in about
what happened in the days and weeks and
months before what he must have I'm
guessing
learned stuff in conversations even
though they were very careful
after the fact so mice I just he just
has to know more than he let me know and
as you say the most of what he let me
know that's new other than the run to
the disappearance most of what he let me
know about the disappearance and the
after-party so to speak happened in this
one conversation this one very unguarded
conversation where he kind of went into
a trance and spilled the beans so to
speak
and there was just a whole bunch more he
was always struggling when he was
telling me things at the edge of America
he wanted to tell me things he was
trying to tell me things he was hinting
at things but he was always holding back
I'm sure he didn't tell me everything
yeah okay one more question kind of
about the America business it's about
the the mob having in a certain sense an
ethical system of its own and and also
that just the the kind of a moral
relativism that you can look at the mob
with if you want you know that's in a
way part of The Sopranos you know hey
these are real people with real concerns
and there's kind of some of that in your
in your book I mean partly just because
these like serious mob figures we're
part of you know you knew him as a kid
they were nice and and and yet you know
there's a part of the book I don't want
to and you kind of that was kind of my
sense for for the first part of the book
I was kind of in that spirit of it hey
who you know if I had been born in you
know and there she which of course is
true I would be like them but anyway the
the but then there's a point and I don't
want to give away maybe too much of a
plot spoiler but there's a point when we
learn that Jack alone Ian in particular
betrays Hoffa and about his thorough
going away as you can imagine if you
just a man like what are the worst
things you can do to a supposed friend
and colleague he touches a couple of the
big bases yes and and and and actually
Chucky's mother is involved this is
this is a decade just to get clear a
decade before the disappearance right
this is in the 60s and this comes to
just kind of - maybe foreshadow where
we're gonna talk about our next
conversation this comes up via FBI
surveillance so we have actual
recordings of them talking about this
and at that point I just thought man
these people are scum I mean this is
just III had like a sick feeling I
really did so did I and I think this I
think this just to put it in context I
think what I can tell what they did
basically if you want the point is that
there were scum enos all around I mean
listening in in these recordings and
listening to the actual human sinned so
to speak and listening to everyone
manipulating everyone else so yes
Anthony Jacqueline II and Chucky's
mother were manipulating Hoffa Hoffa was
manipulating them he was using them to
keep his unwell wife out of his hair
whom he had basically completely
neglected it was all transactional and
everyone was trying to get a better
transaction that's the way they all
dealt it was ultimately everything was
transactional and the only question was
who is getting the better end of the
deal it was sleazy I mean it was
terrible and it was disgusting to read
and I read thousands of pages of it yeah
so what is your what is your in the end
do you have a way of thinking about the
mob and it's in its code I mean how
morally relativistic do you wind up not
very but a little bit at the end then
I'll explain I don't have any patience
for organized crime I mean in my adult
in my adult consciousness I mean in in
my current situation and basically ever
since I was I left Chuckie I have no
tolerance and nothing nice to say about
any of the things they do they're
lawbreakers they are vicious they are
there's just not there's very little to
say at the level of what they do in
their defense and omerta is basically
you know one of the reasons mob stories
are so
popular is because these values are real
and they seem important and they seem to
have moral content and yet they're
they're held in the service of illegal
or evil hens so I didn't have much
tolerance for that and I went uh key
basically when it became clear that this
was gonna be a hurdle to our
conversations I viewed it as just an
excuse to hide crimes or not talk about
things he didn't want to talk about her
whatever that said in the very end you
might say some moral relativism slipped
in for me because at the very end of our
conversations I came to see how painful
it was couple times and Chucky slipped
up and told me things he he shouldn't
have this was enormous ly painful for
him not because he was worried about his
skin because he had violated his
commitments and I came to see how
central this was to his life I came to
see how it was kind of constituted his
identity I came to see how it was the
thing that he spent 44 years suffering
these untruths for in effect I mean he
could have cleared his name so to speak
and it was so important to him and it
was so painful for him for me to be
bumping up against it and in our last
conversation when basically the last
time and I told myself this is the last
time I'm gonna ask him about the
disappearance and I asked her I said I
just you know I know you know more than
you're telling me and I can't believe
you're gonna take that to your grave and
he basically said well you should
believe it doc because I am and he
basically said it was just a matter of
Honor for him and it was important to
him and he just wasn't gonna do it
because it was wrong and I described
that as as an acceptor ik integrity and
I think that's what it was and call it
moral relativism if you like I came to
admire it and I didn't want to tamper
with it anymore
and it's this is a man who was raised
the way he was raised and this was the
principle that he was most committed to
and he stuck with it as best as he could
through thick and thin to the end okay
well it's a fascinating book let me say
a little about what we're gonna talk
about in the next conversation there's a
moment in the book when you're in the
Bush administration
it's after 9/11 you're wrestling with
civil liberties issues there's a
surveillance program that's I guess not
known to the public you're having you're
having doubts about its legal foundation
and and and you come across a Supreme
Court case called O'Brien versus
something it turns out Chucky's case you
would never he had talked about you
hadn't believed that it really existed
even and and this and and and and then
there's just as intersection as you
wrestle with these questions of the two
stories of these two parts of your life
and one thing I'll ask you next time I'm
not gonna ask you now as to what extent
you think your experience with Chucky
may be actually influence your conduct
in the Bush administration and how you
wind up round up resolving these things
because remember Chuck you've been
telling you all along I mean the
government is here you don't understand
the government is doing all kinds of
secret stuff that ain't legit and and we
are the victims of it and and so it's
really interesting so in the next
conversation when I get into that I want
to get into the whole I want to start
with the whole well I want to start with
J Edgar Hoover and Bobby Kennedy and
Bobby's conflict with the mob and so on
but there's plenty of stuff to talk
about meanwhile I just want to say it's
a great book and I let me I've been
listening to it on inaudible but there
is a physical book as well it's called
Inhofe a shadow a stepfather a
disappearance in Detroit and my search
for the truth by Jack Goldsmith so
thanks for taking the time and thanks
for sticking around for the next
conversation thank you so much